---
layout: post
title: Reviving my web page
blurb: A fresh start for my technical writing.
---

I am reviving my personal web page after a multi-year inactivity.

The old one got its brief moment of glory after I had published an article in
which I described—in lengthy details—how I helped a fairly successful startup
scale its production using Kubernetes, in the early days of the project (2016,
the "hard way" at the time). It then turned into a graveyard of aborted
articles, rotting on my hard drive, never to be steered out of the _draft_
spiral.

## A look back

I was originally aiming for too much: long and technical articles (10+ minutes
read), with the side goal of helping me validate that I truly mastered the
subjects I was writing about ("if I can't explain it clearly, I don't know it
well enough"). Which is ironic in retrospect, considering that my deteriorating
attention span rarely allows me to read such long articles from the beginning
to the end, unless they are closely related to a subject I'm practically
involved with at that exact moment.

Although jotting things down and leaving them in an incomplete state was still
beneficial for myself to some extent, not going the extra mile and actually
publishing my thoughts defied the purpose of a personal page in the first
place. My lack of progress turned into guilt over time. I can think about
different reasons to explain this; the main ones are—without the shadow of a
doubt—poor time allocation of personal time, and my tendency to overthink my
writing before I even lay down the overall structure.

## A different approach

But the demise of the first incarnation of my personal page isn't the topic of
the day. The topic of the day is me reviving my personal page in a sightly
different format.

Experience—and discipline in various areas of my life—taught me that regular
yet reasonable commitment is significantly more likely to yield positive long
term results than stints of extraordinary efforts segmented with long breaks.
In the present case, the goal for me is to have a framework in place that
allows me to produce content which I enjoy writing and doesn't turn into a
burden. I want to get myself to write more often, not longer, and over time get
better, and especially faster, at doing it. (If it is read by someone, brings
them value, and sparks conversations, that's even better!)

I am also in a different place today than I was 7 years ago when it comes to
interacting with people online. I have gradually distanced myself from Twitter
and its culture of permanent outrage. The recent rebranding to "X" (and what led
to it) has nothing to do with it, the algorithm had been encouraging distortion,
exaggeration and amplification for long before those events.

In comparison, a personal page feels like the right platform for fostering my
curiosity. I am therefore starting from a blank page[^1], with a minimal new
theme and a distraction free layout[^2]. This time around, I decided for a
radically bare design: no banner picture, no scripts, no analytics, no comments
section. I didn't even bother using fonts [other than the system ones][2],
modern systems ship with good enough default typography anyway.

Also, seeing one's own words on an elegantly presented medium is very
satisfying, isn't it?

[^1]: The old content remains [archived][1] on GitHub.
[^2]: As insignificant as it may sound, the fact that my previous theme encouraged uploading a properly cropped picture for each article was in itself a cause of internal friction.

[1]: https://github.com/antoineco/antoineco.github.io/tree/old
[2]: https://macwright.com/2016/05/03/the-featherweight-website.html
